# Do Primaries Work? Nomination Politics and the Representation of Local Preferences

As general election competition in the U.S. becomes increasingly driven by partisanship, party nomination contests are perhaps more consequential than ever. Yet research on U.S. elections knows little about whether primaries serve their stated purpose: to represent the preferences of local partisan voters. Political scientists believe that primary elections present candidates with a "strategic positioning dilemma"---to win both the nomination and the general election, candidates must position themselves as some spatial compromise between the preferences of their partisan base and the district median voter. This theory of primaries rests on shaky ground both theoretically and empirically. Theoretically, primary elections present voters with uniquely high informational demands, and voters may not meet them. Learning the policy positions of candidates is costly, especially when all candidates share the same party label. Moreover, informal party networks may overshadow voter preferences in shaping primary outcomes. Empirically, research on primary representation is hindered by a limited understanding of local partisan preferences. Most existing research measures local preferences using rough proxies that do not distinguish between Republican and Democratic preferences (such as vote shares) or do not operationalize citizen preferences at all.

This dissertation puts the big questions of primary representation to the test using recent data on U.S. House primaries. Do candidates position themselves in response to the ideological median in their partisan constituency? Do partisan constituencies nominate candidates that better match their ideological preferences? These questions are key to understanding primaries, but they are not confronted directly in existing research. This project develops a unique set of ideal point estimates for local "party publics"---partisan groups within districts---by fitting a group-level IRT model to public opinion data in recent election cycles. The model estimates the ideological medians of Republican and Democratic identifiers within districts and the degree of ideological heterogeneity within each group. With direct measures of local partisan preferences, further research can examine the power of individuals vs. groups in shaping nomination contests, the quality of electoral accountability in "safe" districts, and the ideological dimensions along which the two parties compete in primaries.
